In the last section you learned about
expressions and operators. In this section we're going to use these expressions
and operators along with conditional statements
to implement interactivity in our applications. In JavaScript
we have two types of conditional statements, we have
if and else, and switch and case. You're going to learn about if and else
in this lecture, and we'll look at switch and case in the next lecture.
So imagine in our application we're going to get the current hour
and depending on it's value, we're going to greet the user with a different message
so if the hour is between
let's say 6am and 12pm, you
display something like good morning. Similarly, if
it is between 12pm and 6pm we're going to display
good afternoon. Otherwise we're going to display
good evening. So we want to have some logic like this in our application.
That's where we use if and else. So we start with
the if, then we add parenthesis. And
in between these parenthesis, we add a condition. If this
condition evaluates to true, the statement we put
after will be executed. Now if you have multiple statements,
we need to put them in between these curly
braces. We refer to these as a block of code.
Okay? Now optionally, we can have another condition
so we write else if once again parenthesis,
anotherCondition. Now, if this
condition is true, then this other statement will be executed
and similarly, if we have multiple statements, we need to surround them with
curly braces. Like this. Also note that
as a convention, when we want to define a block of code,
we put the first curly brace on the same line, not here,
that's kind of ugly in JavaScript, so take that into account,
now back to our if and else, we could have yet another
condition like this, yet another condition, we could have as many conditions
as we want, there is no limitation. And once again here
we have 1 or more statements, now optionally if none
of these conditions evaluate to true, we could use else
to execute 1 or more other statements.
So this is the basic structure. Now,
we want to get this logic and map it into this structure.
It's very easy. So let's start with our first condition.
If hour is between 6am and 12 pm, so that's the
condition, and the statement we want to execute is good morning,
okay? So I'm going to declare a variable here,
hour and set it to 10, now in a real world application we want to
read the current hour. For now, let's now worry about getting the current time and
hard code this number here, 10. So,
we want to compare the value of hour with these
two numbers. Now for simplicity, let's go with 24 hour time format
so we want to see if hour is greater than
or equal to 6, and
hour is less than 12. You learned this in the last section, right?
So here we're using these comparison operators,
we have two expressions, here's the first one, here's the second one,
and we're applying the logical and in between them.
So, if both these expressions evaluate to true, than the result
of this expression will also be true. Now let's add the statement.
You want to display good morning.
And of course we need to terminate this statement with a
semi colon. Now here's my suggestion for you. If you want to master JavaScript
pause the video now and continue implementing this logic
using if and else then come back continue watching and see my
solution.
Alright let's continue. Here's a second condition. You want
to check to see if hour is between 12 and 18. So,
very easy. If hour is greater than or
equal to 12, and it's less than
18. We want to display good afternoon. So
console.log good afternoon.
Now in this example, we don't need this other else if
because otherwise we want to display good evening. So let's delete
this, otherwise we do a console.log
of good evening. Now in this
example, because we're dealing with a single statement
these curly braces are getting in the way and creating noise in the code.
So it's better to get rid of them and simplify the code
here's another pair, okay, that's better.
Save the changes, we get good morning here, if I change the
hour to 13, we get good afternoon, and if
I change this to 20, we get good evening.
So this is all about if and else. In the next lecture, you're going to learn about
switch and case.